[SPARK][PROTOCOL RFC] Checkpoint Protection (#4153)
delta-io/delta: protocol_rfcs/checkpoint-protection.md

With these changes, we can drop table features in a single command without needing to truncate history. More importantly, they simplify the drop feature user journey by requiring a single execution of the DROP FEATURE command.

**For further discussions about this protocol change, please refer to the Github issue - https://github.com/delta-io/delta/issues/4152**

--------

> ***New Section***
# Checkpoint Protection

The `checkpointProtection` is a Writer feature that allows writers to clean up metadata iff metadata can be cleaned up to the `requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion` table property in one go.

Enablement:
- The table must be on Writer Version 7 and Reader Version 1.
- The feature `checkpointProtection` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `writerFeatures`.

## Writer Requirements for Checkpoint Protection

> For tables with `checkpointProtection` supported in the protocol, writers need to check `requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion` before cleaning up metadata. Metadata clean up can proceed iff metadata can be cleaned up to the `requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion` table property in one go. This means that a single cleanup operation should truncate up to `requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion` as opposed to several cleanup operations truncating in chunks.

Reviewer: Write out "if and only if". Not everyone is necessarily familiar with the iff shorthand.

Reviewer: Can you clarify what "in one go" really means? What are the exact invariants that need to be upheld at any point here?

Author: Added clarifications.

Reviewer: Thanks

> For tables with `checkpointProtection` supported in the protocol, writers need to check `requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion` before cleaning up metadata. Metadata clean up can proceed if and only if metadata can be cleaned up to the `requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion` table property in one go. This means that a single cleanup operation should truncate up to `requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion` as opposed to several cleanup operations truncating in chunks. Furthermore, before removing checkpoints, all associated commits need to be removed first. This operation should have the same atomicity guarantees (if any) as with the regular metadata cleanup operation.

Reviewer 2: Trying to weaken the requirements so that writers can still do incremental cleanup if they can prove that it is safe.

```suggestion
For tables with `checkpointProtection` supported in the protocol:

a) Writers must not clean up any checkpoints for table versions before the version given by table property `delta.requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion`. 

b) Writers must not create new checkpoints for table versions before the version given by table property `delta.requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion` unless they support all of the features in the table protocol at that version.

c) Writers must not clean up version history for table versions for which they do not support the protocol. A writer is allowed to clean up a range of versions if it supports all table features for every version that is being cleaned up. If a writer does not support the protocol for some of the versions that are being cleaned up, then the cleanup is allowed if and only if the cleanup includes _all_ table versions before the version given by  `delta.requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion`. In this case, a single cleanup operation should truncate the history up to that boundary version in one go as opposed to several cleanup operations truncating in chunks.

d) In version history cleanup, writers must remove commits _before_ removing the associated checkpoints, so that requirement (a) is satisfied even during the cleanup.
```

There are two exceptions to this rule. If any of the two holds, the rule above can be ignored:

a) The writer does not create any checkpoints during history cleanup and does not erase any checkpoints after the truncation version.

> b) The writer verifies it supports all protocols between `[start, min(requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion, targetCleanupVersion)]`.

Reviewer: Either write "in the closed range" instead of "between" or actually make it two separate values, rather than a single closed range notation.

> b) The writer verifies it supports all protocols in the closed range `[start, min(requireCheckpointProtectionBeforeVersion, targetCleanupVersion)]` (assuming a single checkpoint is created at `targetCleanupVersion`).

Reviewer 2: I think this can be completely removed if we make the change above.
